# Real-time TDDFT

## Overview

Real-time time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT) is a
DFT-based approach to electronic excited states based on integrating the
time-dependent Kohn-Sham (TDKS) equations in time. The theoretical
underpinnings, strengths, and limitations are similar to traditional
linear-response (LR) [TDDFT](Excited-State-Calculations "wikilink")
methods, but instead of a frequency domain solution to the TDKS
equations, RT-TDDFT yields a full time-resolved, potentially non-linear
solution. Real-time simulations can be used to compute not only
spectroscopic properties (e.g., absorption spectra, polarizabilites,
etc), but also the time and space-resolved electronic response to
arbitrary external stimuli (e.g., electron charge dynamics after laser
excitation). For theoretical and computational details, please refer to
the following paper:

1.  K. Lopata, N. Govind,"Modeling Fast Electron Dynamics with Real-Time
    Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory: Application to Small
    Molecules and Chromophores", J. Chem. Theory Comput., 7, 1344 (2011)

This functionality is built on the [Gaussian basis set
DFT](Density-Functional-Theory-for-Molecules "wikilink") module, and
will work for closed-shell (spin-restricted) and open-shell (spin
unrestricted) calculations with essentially any combination of basis set
and exchange-correlation functional in NWChem. The current
implementation assumes frozen nuclei (Born-Oppenheimer approximation).

In a nutshell, running a RT-TDDFT calculation takes the following form:

1.  Compute ground state density matrix with DFT module
2.  Propagate density matrix using RT-TDDFT
3.  Post-process resulting time-dependent observables (e.g., dipole
    moment)

## Units

Unless specified otherwise, all inputs and outputs are in **atomic
units**. Some useful conversions are:

<table border="1">

<tr>

<th>

Quantity

</th>

<th>

Conversion

</th>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>

Time

</td>

<td>

1 au = 0.02419 fs

</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>

Length

</td>

<td>

1 au = 0.5292 A

</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>

Energy

</td>

<td>

1 au = 27.2114 eV

</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>

Electric field

</td>

<td>

1 au = 514.2 V/nm

</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>

Dipole moment

</td>

<td>

1 au = 2.542 D

</td>

</tr>

</table>

## Syntax

The [charge](Charge "wikilink"), [geometry](Geometry "wikilink"), [basis
set](Basis "wikilink"), and
[DFT](Density-Functional-Theory-for-Molecules "wikilink") options are
all specified as normal, using their respective syntax. Real-time TDDFT
parameters are supplied in the RT\_TDDFT block (note, nothing is
case-sensitive), with all possible options summarized below, and each
discussed in detail
afterwards.

`RT_TDDFT`  
`  [TMAX <double default 1000>]`  
`  [DT <double default 0.1>]`  
`  [TAG <string default "`<rt_tddft>`: "]`  
`  [LOAD (scf || vectors `<string>`)]`  
`  [NCHECKS <integer default 10>]`  
`  [NPRINTS (* || `<integer>`)]`  
`  [NRESTARTS (* || `<integer>`)]`  
`  [TOLERANCES (zero <double default 1e-8> || series <double default 1e-10> || interpol <double default 1e-7>)]`  
`  [PROPAGATOR (euler || rk4 || magnus) default magnus]`  
`  [EXP (diag || pseries)]`  
`  [PROF]`  
`  [NOPROP]`  
`  [STATIC]`  
`  [PRINT (*, dipole, quadrupole, field, moocc, field, energy, cputime, charge, convergence, s2)]`  
`  [EXCITE `<string geomname>` with `<string fieldname>`]`  
`  [FIELD]`  
`    ...`  
`  [END]`  
`  [VISUALIZATION]`  
`    ...`  
`  [END]`  
`END`

### TMAX -- Simulation time

This option specifies the maximum time (in au) to run the simulation
before stopping, which must be a positive real number. In practice, you
can just stop the simulation early, so in most cases it is simplest to
just set this to a large value to ensure you capture all the important
dynamics (see [Hints and
Tricks](RT-TDDFT#Hints_and_Tricks "wikilink")). For most
valence excitations, for example, 1000 au is overkill so you might want
to automatically stop at 500 au:

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  tmax 500.0`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### DT -- Time step

This specifies the electronic time step for time integration. A larger
time step results in a faster simulation, but there are two issues which
limit the size of the time step. First, the integration algorithm can
become unstable and/or inaccurate for larger time steps, which depends
on the integrator used. Very roughly speaking, the second order Magnus
integrator should be reliable for time steps up to 0.2 au. Second, you
must choose a time step small enough to capture the oscillations of
interest, i.e., to resolve an excitation of energy <img alt="$\omega$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/ae4fb5973f393577570881fc24fc2054.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="10.781595pt" height="14.10255pt"/>, your time
step needs to be smaller than <img alt="$\pi / \omega$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/87993fbf847434803c2454e87093dc46.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="28.89513pt" height="24.56553pt"/>, and typically a tenth of
that for accuracy. For example, to capture high energy oscillations such
as core-level excitations (e.g., <img alt="$\omega = 50$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/130501d8bc013f1b8aaeb348a5e32a95.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="49.030575pt" height="21.10812pt"/> au) you might want a
relative small time step:

`rt_tddft`  
` ...`  
` dt 0.01`  
` ...`  
`end`

It is always good practice to check that your results are independent of
time step.

### TAG -- Output label

This option sets a label for the output for convenient parsing (e.g.,
with "grep"). Every output line with time-dependent data will begin with
this string (set to "<rt_tddft>: " by default). For example setting:

`rt_tddft`  
` ...`  
` tag "nameofrun"`  
` ...`  
`end`

will result in outputs that look like:

`...`  
`nameofrun      2.20000  -7.589146713114E+001     # Etot`  
`...`

### NCHECKS -- Number of run-time check points

This option takes an integer number (default 10), or "\*" which means
every step, which sets the total of number of run-time checkpoints,
where various sanity checks are made such as symmetries, idempotency,
traces, etc. These checks are not terribly efficient (e.g., involve
re-building the TD Fock matrix) so excessive checking will slow down
execution.

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  nchecks 10`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### NPRINTS -- Number of print points

This sets the number of print points, i.e., the total number of
time-dependent observables (e.g., dipole, charge, energy) that are
computed and printed. It either takes an integer number or "\*" which
means every time step (this is the default). Since there is no
appreciable cost to computing and printing these quantities, there is
usually no need to change this from "\*".

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  nprints *`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### NRESTARTS -- Number of restart checkpoints

This sets the number of run-time check points where the time-dependent
complex density matrix is saved to file, allowing the simulation to be
[restarted](RT-TDDFT#Restarts "wikilink")) from that point. By
default this is set to 0. There is no significant computational cost to
restart checkpointing, but of course there is some disk I/O cost (which
may become somewhat significant for larger systems). For example, in the
following example there will be 100 restart points, which corresponds to
1 backup every 100 time steps.

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  tmax 1000.0`  
`  dt 0.1`  
`  nrestarts 100`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### TOLERANCES -- Controlling numerical tolerances

This option controls various numerical tolerances:

  - zero: threshold for checks that quantities are zero, e.g., in
    symmetry checks (default 1e-8)
  - series: numerical convergence for series, e.g., matrix
    exponentiation (default 1e-10)
  - interpol: numerical convergence for interpolation, e.g., in Magnus
    propagator (default 1e-7)

Occasionally it is useful to loosen the interpolation tolerances if the
Magnus interpolator requires an excessive amount of steps; usually this
will not impact accuracy. For example, this sets the tolerances to their
defaults with a looser interpolation tolerance:

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  tolerances zero 1d-8 series 1d-10 interpol 1e-5`  
`end`

### PROPAGATOR -- Selecting the integrator method

This selects the propagtor (i.e., time integrator) method. Possible
choices include "euler" for Euler integration (terrible, you should
never use this), "rk4" for 4th order Runge-Kutta, and "magnus" for 2nd
order Magnus with self-consistent interpolation. In virtually all cases
Magnus is superior in terms of stability. Euler or rk4 are perhaps only
useful for debugging or simplicity (e.g., for code development).

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  propagator magnus`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### EXP -- Selecting the matrix exponentiation method

This selects the method for exponentiation matrices. For now this can
either be "pseries" for a contractive power series or "diag" for
diagonalization. In general the power series (default) is faster.

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  exp diag`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### PROF -- Run-time profiling

This turns on run-time profiling, which will display time spent in each
component of the code (e.g., building components of the TD Fock matrix,
properites, etc). This slows code down slightly and results in very
verbose output.

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  prof`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### NOPROP -- Skipping propagation

This options causes the RT-TDDFT module skip propagation, i.e., to
initialize and finalize. For now this is largely useful for skipping to
visualization post-processing without having to re-run a simulation.

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  noprop`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### STATIC -- Force static Fock matrix

This option sets the static Fock matrix flag, meaning the time-dependent
Fock matrix will not be recalculated at each time, but instead use the
t=0 value. This will drastically increase the simulation speed since the
bulk of the work is spent rebuilding the TD Fock matrix, but will give
non-physical results. For example, using "static" to compute an
absorption spectrum will result in excitations corresponding to the raw
eigenvalue differences without electron-hole relaxation. This option has
few uses besides dry-runs and debugging.

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  static`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### PRINT -- Selecting time-dependent quantities to be printed

This sets the various time-dependent properties that are to be computed
and printed at each print point. Note that for many of these options,
the values are computed and printed for each geometry specified in the
input deck, not only the active one (i.e., the one set using "set
geometry ..." in the input deck). Possible choices are:

  - dipole: Dipole moment
  - quadrupole: Quadrupole moment
  - field: External (applied) electric field
  - moocc: Molecular orbital occupations
  - energy: Components of system energy (e.g., core, XC, total, etc)
  - cputime: CPU time taken in simulation so far (useful for checking
    scaling)
  - charge: Electronic charge (computed from density matrix, not from
    the XC grid)
  - convergence: Convergence information (e.g., from Magnus)
  - s2: <S2> value (openshell only)
  - \*: Print all quantities

The defaults correspond to:

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  print dipole field energy convergence`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### FIELD -- Sub-block for specifying external electric fields

This sub-block is used to specify external electric fields, each of
which must be given a unique name. Numerous fields can be specified, but
each will applied to the system only if an appropriate [excitation
rule](RT-TDDFT#excite----excitation-rules "wikilink") is set.
There are a few preset field types; others would have to be manually
coded. Note the names are arbitrary, but chosen here to be
descriptive:

`field "kick"`  
`  type delta      # E(t=0) = max; E(t>0) = 0`  
`  polarization x  # = x, y, z`  
`  max 0.0001      # maximum value of electric field`  
`  spin total      # = alpha, beta, total (only valid for open-shell)`  
`end`

`field "gpulse"`  
`  type gaussian   # Gaussian enveloped quasi-monochromatic pulse: E(t) = exp( -(t-t0)^2 / 2s^2)`  
`  polarization x  # = x, y, z`  
`  frequency 0.12  # frequency of laser pulse in au (e.g., 0.12 au = 3.27 eV)`  
`  center 200.0    # center of Gaussian envelope (in au time)`  
`  width 50.0      # width of Gaussian pulse (in au time)`  
`  max 0.0001      # maximum value of electric field`  
`  spin total      # = alpha, beta, total (only valid for open-shell)`  
`end`

`field "hpulse"`  
`  type hann       # sin^2 (Hann) enveloped quasi-monochromatic pulse`  
`  polarization x  # = x, y, z`  
`  frequency 0.12  # frequency of laser pulse in au (e.g., 0.12 au = 3.27 eV)`  
`  center 200.0    # center of Hann envelope (in au time)`  
`  width 50.0      # width of Hann pulse (in au time)`  
`  max 0.0001      # maximum value of electric field`  
`  spin total      # = alpha, beta, total (only valid for open-shell)`  
`end`

`field "resonant"`  
`  type cw         # monochromatic continuous wave`  
`  frequency 0.12  # frequency of laser pulse in au (e.g., 0.12 au = 3.27 eV)`  
`  polarization x  # = x, y, z`  
`  max 0.0001      # maximum value of electric field`  
`  spin total      # = alpha, beta, total (only valid for open-shell)`  
`end`

### EXCITE -- Excitation rules

This sets the rules for applying external fields to the system. It takes
the form "excite <geom> with <field>", where <geom> is the name of a
geometry fragment (defaults to "geometry" which is the default geometry
name), and <field> is the name of a [field
structure](RT-TDDFT#field----sub-block-for-specifying-external-electric-fields "wikilink").
Assuming, for example, you have defined a field name "kick" this option
takes the form (note that quotes are optional and shown for clarity):

`rt_tddft`  
`  ...`  
`  excite "geometry" with "kick"`  
`  ...`  
`end`

### VISUALIZATION -- Sub-block for controlling 3D visualization

This block is used to control visualization of the electronic charge
density, which is typically used during a resonant excitation. This is a
two stage process. During the propagation, a series of density matrices
will be dumped to file (see options below). After propagation, if the
"dplot" option is set, the code will read in options from a separate
DPLOT block and convert the density matrix snapshots to a corresponding
series of real-space charge density "cube"
files.

`visualization`  
`  tstart 0.0        # start visualization at this time`  
`  tend 100.0        # stop visualization at this time`  
`  treference 0.0    # subtract density matrix at this time (useful for difference densities)`  
`  dplot             # post-process density matrices into cube files after propagation`  
`end`

## Worked Examples

### Absorption spectrum of water

Here, we compute the 6-31G/TD-PBE0 absorption spectrum of gas-phase
water using RT-TDDFT. In the weak-field limit, these results are
essentially identical to those obtained via traditional linear-response
TDDFT. Although it involves significantly more work do use RT-TDDFT in
this case, for very large systems with many roots a real-time approach
becomes advantageous computationally and also does not suffer from
algorithm stability issues.

To compute the absorption, we find the ground state of the system and
then subject it to three delta-function excitations (x,y,z), which
simultaneously excites all electronic modes of that polarization. The
three resulting dipole moments are then Fourier transformed to give the
frequency-dependent linear polarizabilty, and thus the absorption
spectrum. The full input deck is
[RT\_TDDFT\_h2o\_abs.nw](RT_TDDFT_h2o_abs.nw "wikilink") and
the corresponding output is
[RT\_TDDFT\_h2o\_abs.nwo.gz](RT_TDDFT_h2o_abs.nwo.gz "wikilink").

`title "Water TD-PBE0 absorption spectrum"`  
`echo`  
`scratch_dir ./scratch`  
`permanent_dir ./perm`  
  
`start water`  
  
`##                                                                                                                                                                           `  
`## aug-cc-pvtz / pbe0 optimized                                                                                                                                              `  
`##                                                                                                                                                                           `  
`## Note: you are required to explicitly name the geometry                                                                                                                    `  
`##                                                                                                                                                                           `  
`geometry "system" units angstroms nocenter noautoz noautosym`  
`  O     0.00000000    -0.00001441    -0.34824012`  
`  H    -0.00000000     0.76001092    -0.93285191`  
`  H     0.00000000    -0.75999650    -0.93290797`  
`end`  
  
`## Note: We need to explicitly set the "active" geometry even though there is only one geom.                                                                                 `  
`set geometry "system"`  
  
`## All DFT and basis parameters are inherited by the RT-TDDFT code                                                                                                           `  
`basis`  
` * library 6-31G`  
`end`  
  
`dft`  
`  xc pbe0`  
`end`  
  
`## Compute ground state of the system                                                                                                                                        `  
`task dft energy`  
  
`##                                                                                                                                                                           `  
`## Now, we compute an x, y, and z kick simulation, which we give separate "tags" for post-processing.                                                                  `  
`##                                                                                                                                                                           `  
  
`unset rt_tddft:*`  
`rt_tddft`  
`  tmax 200.0`  
`  dt 0.2`  
` `  
`  tag "kick_x"`  
`  `  
`  field "kick"`  
`    type delta`  
`    polarization x`  
`    max 0.0001`  
`  end`  
  
`  excite "system" with "kick"`  
` end`  
`task dft rt_tddft`  
  
`unset rt_tddft:*`  
`rt_tddft`  
`  tmax 200.0`  
`  dt 0.2`  
` `  
`  tag "kick_y"`  
` `  
`  field "kick"`  
`    type delta`  
`    polarization y`  
`    max 0.0001`  
`  end`  
` `  
`  excite "system" with "kick"`  
` end`  
`task dft rt_tddft`  
  
`unset rt_tddft:*`  
`rt_tddft`  
`  tmax 200.0`  
`  dt 0.2`  
` `  
`  tag "kick_z"`  
` `  
`  field "kick"`  
`    type delta`  
`    polarization z`  
`    max 0.0001`  
`  end`  
` `  
`  excite "system" with "kick"`  
` end`  
`task dft rt_tddft`

After running the simulation, we extract the x-dipole moment for the
x-kick and similarly for the y and z-kicks (see "contrib/parsers"
directory for this script or download here:
[RT\_TDDFT\_scripts.tgz](RT_TDDFT_scripts.tgz "wikilink") ).

`nw_rtparse.py -xdipole -px -tkick_x h2o_abs.nwo > x.dat`  
`nw_rtparse.py -xdipole -py -tkick_y h2o_abs.nwo > y.dat`  
`nw_rtparse.py -xdipole -pz -tkick_z h2o_abs.nwo > z.dat`

Note, the syntax for extracting the x polarization for the x-kick, etc.
Alternatively, we could grep and cut, or whatnot. This will give use the
resulting time-dependent dipole moments:

<img alt="Time-dependent dipole moments" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/RT_TDDFT_h2o_td_dipoles.png" align=middle with="730pt" height="200pt"/>  

Now, we need to take the Fourier transforms of these dipole moments to
yield the the x,x element of the 3x3 linear polarizability tensor, and
similarly for the y,y and z,z elements. Here I am using an FFT utility,
although any discrete Fourier transform will do. To accelerate
convergence of the FFT, I have damped the time signals by
<img alt="$\exp(-t / \tau)$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/5e63d73d92b58041531afaf7d225930d.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="73.711935pt" height="24.56553pt"/> which results in Lorentzians with FWHM of
<img alt="$2 / \tau$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/37a3e0871d016fe54fe36230326b31bd.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="25.390035pt" height="24.56553pt"/> and have also "zero padded" the data with 50000 points.
This is not critical for extracting frequencies, but creates "cleaner"
spectra, although care must be taken to damp sufficiently if padding to
avoid artifacts (see small ripples around 23 eV in plot below). After
Fourier transform, I "paste" the three files together to easily plot the
absorption, which is constructed from the trace of the polarizability
matrix, i.e., the sum of the imaginary parts of the FFTs of the dipole
moments.

<img alt="$S (\omega) = \frac{4 \pi \omega}{3 c \kappa} \mathrm{Tr} [ \mathrm{Im} \alpha(\omega) ]$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/4125d04d9944d0dda37cf19a3cdb6030.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="163.404945pt" height="27.72033pt"/>
,

where <img alt="$c$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/3e18a4a28fdee1744e5e3f79d13b9ff6.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="7.087278pt" height="14.10255pt"/> is the speed of light (137 in atomic units), <img alt="$\kappa$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/5c62da39aa7289df62d937cb24a31161.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="9.435855pt" height="14.10255pt"/> is
the kick electric field strength, and <img alt="$\alpha(\omega)$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/82c0292c15b78490b6d50b8ab62a100a.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="34.05864pt" height="24.56553pt"/> is the linear
polarizabilty tensor computed from the Fourier transforms of the
time-dependent dipole moments. For example,

`fft1d -d50 -z -p50000 < x.dat | rotate_fft > xw.dat`  
`fft1d -d50 -z -p50000 < y.dat | rotate_fft > yw.dat`  
`fft1d -d50 -z -p50000 < z.dat | rotate_fft > zw.dat`  
`paste xw.dat yw.dat zw.day > s.dat`

Here, you can just use your favorite Fourier transform utility or
analysis software, but for convenience there is also a simple GNU Octave
fft1d.m utility in the "contrib/parsers" directory of the trunk or
download here:
[RT\_TDDFT\_scripts.tgz](RT_TDDFT_scripts.tgz "wikilink")
Note, options are hardcoded at the moment, so the switches above are not
correct instead edit the file and run (also it reads file rather than
redirect from stdin). Assuming the FFT output takes the form (w, Re, Im,
Abs), to plot using gnuplot we would do:

gnuplot> plot "s.dat" u (<img alt="" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/a30ffaa3e99019a42addf67c6db3631b.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="103.78203pt" height="24.56553pt"/>1*(<img alt="$3+$" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/svgs/fc5ff3bf284ae72bd541757c096f7c9d.svg?invert_in_darkmode&sanitize=true" align=middle width="20.92629pt" height="21.10812pt"/>7+$11))

where we have scaled by 27.2114 to output in eV instead of atomic units,
and we have not properly scaled to get the absolute oscillator strengths
(thus our magnitudes are in "arbitrary units"). The real-time spectrum
is shown below, along with the corresponding linear-response TDDFT
excitations are shown in orange for comparison. Since we are in the weak
field regime, the two are identical. Note the oscillator strengths are
arbitrary and scaled, if not scaled the area under each RT-TDDFT curve
should integrate to the linear response oscillator strength.

<img alt="Linear absorption spectrum" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/RT_TDDFT_h2o_abs_spectrum.png" align=middle with="262pt" height="200pt"/>  

### Resonant ultraviolet excitation of water

In this example we compute the time-dependent electron response to a
quasi-monochromatic laser pulse tuned to a particular transition. We
will use the results of the previous example (6-31G/PBE0 gas-phase
water). First, we consider the absorption spectrum (computed previously)
but plotted for the three polarizations (x,y,z) rather then as a sum.
Say we are interested in the excitation near 10 eV. We can clearly see
this is a z-polarized transition (green on curve). To selectively excite
this we could use a continuous wave E-field, which has a delta-function,
i.e., single frequency, bandwidth but since we are doing finite
simulations we need a suitable envelope. The broader the envelope in
time the narrower the excitation in frequency domain, but of course long
simulations become costly so we need to put some thought into the choice
of our envelope. In this case the peak of interest is spectrally
isolated from other z-polarized peaks, so this is quite straightforward.
The procedure is outlined below, and the corresponding frequency extent
of the pulse is shown on the absorption figure in orange. Note that it
only covers one excitation, i.e., the field selectively excites one
mode. The full input deck is
[RT\_TDDFT\_h2o\_resonant.nw](RT_TDDFT_h2o_resonant.nw "wikilink")
and the output is
[RT\_TDDFT\_h2o\_resonant.nwo.gz](RT_TDDFT_h2o_resonant.nwo.gz "wikilink").

<img alt="Absorption spectrum and excitation bandwidth" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/RT_TDDFT_h2o_resonant_spec_field.png" align=middle with="244pt" height="200pt"/>  

`title "Water TD-PBE0 resonant excitation" `  
`echo`  
`scratch_dir ./scratch`  
`permanent_dir ./perm`  
  
`start water`  
  
`##`  
`## aug-cc-pvtz / pbe0 optimized`  
`##`  
`## Note: you are required to explicitly name the geometry`  
`##`  
`geometry "system" units angstroms nocenter noautoz noautosym`  
`  O     0.00000000    -0.00001441    -0.34824012`  
`  H    -0.00000000     0.76001092    -0.93285191`  
`  H     0.00000000    -0.75999650    -0.93290797`  
`end`  
  
`## Note: We need to explicitly set the "active" geometry even though there is only one geom.`  
`set geometry "system" `  
  
`## All DFT and basis parameters are inherited by the RT-TDDFT code`  
`basis`  
` * library 6-31G`  
`end`  
  
`dft`  
` xc pbe0`  
`end`  
  
`## Compute ground state of the system`  
`task dft energy`  
  
`##`  
`## We excite the system with a quasi-monochromatic`  
`## (Gaussian-enveloped) z-polarized E-field tuned to a transition at`  
`## 10.25 eV.  The envelope takes the form:`  
`##`  
`## G(t) = exp(-(t-t0)^ / 2s^2)`  
`##`  
`## The target excitation has an energy (frequency) of w = 0.3768 au`  
`## and thus an oscillation period of T = 2 pi / w = 16.68 au`  
`##`  
`## Since we are doing a Gaussian envelope in time, we will get a`  
`## Gaussian envelope in frequency (Gaussians are eigenfunctions of a`  
`## Fourier transform), with width equal to the inverse of the width in`  
`## time.  Say, we want a Gaussian in frequency with FWHM = 1 eV`  
`## (recall FWHM = 2 sqrt (2ln2) s_freq) we want an s_freq = 0.42 eV =`  
`## 0.0154 au, thus in time we need s_time = 1 / s_time = 64.8 au.`  
`##`  
`## Now we want the envelope to be effectively zero at t=0, say 1e-8`  
`## (otherwise we get "windowing" effects).  Reordering G(t):`  
`##`  
`## t0 = t - sqrt(-2 s^2 ln G(t))`  
`##`  
`## That means our Gaussian needs to be centered at t0 = 393.3 au.`  
`##`  
`## The total simulation time will be 1000 au to leave lots of time to`  
`## see oscillations after the field has passed.`  
`##`  
`rt_tddft`  
`  tmax 1000.0`  
`  dt 0.2`  
  
`  field "driver"`  
`    type gaussian`  
`    polarization z`  
`    frequency 0.3768  # = 10.25 eV`  
`    center 393.3`  
`    width 64.8`  
`    max 0.0001`  
`  end`  
  
`  excite "system" with "driver"`  
` end`  
`task dft rt_tddft`

<img alt="Time-dependent electric field and dipole moment during resonant excitation" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/RT_TDDFT_h2o_resonant_td.png" align=middle with="268pt" height="200pt"/>  

From the time-dependent dipole moment you can see the field driving the
system into a superposition of the ground state and the one excited
state, which manifests as monochromatic oscillations. After the field
has passed the dipole oscillations continue forever as there is no
damping in the system.

### Charge transfer between a TCNE dimer

Here we compute the time-dependent charge oscillations between a TCNE
(tetracyanoethylene) dimer separated by 3 Angstroms, where the top
molecule starts neutral and the bottom one starts with a -1 charge. This
somewhat non-physical starting point will lead to far-from-equilibrium
dynamics as the charge violently sloshes between the two molecules, with
the oscillation period a function of the molecular separation. The trick
here is to use fragments by have multiple geometries in the input deck,
where each fragment is converged separately, then assembled together
without SCF to use as a starting point. We use a small but diffuse basis
and a range-separated functional (CAM-B3LYP). The input deck is
[RT\_TDDFT\_tcne\_dimer.nw](RT_TDDFT_tcne_dimer.nw "wikilink")
and the full output is
[RT\_TDDFT\_tcne\_dimer.nwo.gz](RT_TDDFT_tcne_dimer.nwo.gz "wikilink").

`title "Tetracyanoethylene dimer charge transfer"`  
  
`echo`  
`scratch_dir ./scratch`  
`permanent_dir ./perm`  
  
`start tcne`  
`echo`  
  
`##`  
`## Each fragment optimized with cc-pvdz/B3LYP`  
`##`  
`geometry "bottom" units angstroms noautosym nocenter noautoz`  
` C    -1.77576486     0.66496556     0.00004199`  
` N    -2.94676621     0.71379797     0.00004388`  
` C    -0.36046718     0.62491168     0.00003506`  
` C     0.36049301    -0.62492429    -0.00004895`  
` C     1.77579907    -0.66504145    -0.00006082`  
` N     2.94680364    -0.71382258    -0.00006592`  
` C    -0.31262746    -1.87038951    -0.00011201`  
` N    -0.85519492    -2.90926164    -0.00016331`  
` C     0.31276207     1.87031662     0.00010870`  
` N     0.85498782     2.90938919     0.00016857`  
`end`  
  
`geometry "top" units angstroms noautosym nocenter noautoz`  
` C    -1.77576486     0.66496556     3.00004199`  
` N    -2.94676621     0.71379797     3.00004388`  
` C    -0.36046718     0.62491168     3.00003506`  
` C     0.36049301    -0.62492429     2.99995105`  
` C     1.77579907    -0.66504145     2.99993918`  
` N     2.94680364    -0.71382258     2.99993408`  
` C    -0.31262746    -1.87038951     2.99988799`  
` N    -0.85519492    -2.90926164     2.99983669`  
` C     0.31276207     1.87031662     3.00010870`  
` N     0.85498782     2.90938919     3.00016857`  
`end`  
  
  
`## dimer geometry is the union of bottom and top geometry`  
`geometry "dimer" units angstroms noautosym nocenter noautoz`  
` C    -1.77576486     0.66496556     0.00004199`  
` N    -2.94676621     0.71379797     0.00004388`  
` C    -0.36046718     0.62491168     0.00003506`  
` C     0.36049301    -0.62492429    -0.00004895`  
` C     1.77579907    -0.66504145    -0.00006082`  
` N     2.94680364    -0.71382258    -0.00006592`  
` C    -0.31262746    -1.87038951    -0.00011201`  
` N    -0.85519492    -2.90926164    -0.00016331`  
` C     0.31276207     1.87031662     0.00010870`  
` N     0.85498782     2.90938919     0.00016857`  
`#---`  
` C    -1.77576486     0.66496556     3.00004199`  
` N    -2.94676621     0.71379797     3.00004388`  
` C    -0.36046718     0.62491168     3.00003506`  
` C     0.36049301    -0.62492429     2.99995105`  
` C     1.77579907    -0.66504145     2.99993918`  
` N     2.94680364    -0.71382258     2.99993408`  
` C    -0.31262746    -1.87038951     2.99988799`  
` N    -0.85519492    -2.90926164     2.99983669`  
` C     0.31276207     1.87031662     3.00010870`  
` N     0.85498782     2.90938919     3.00016857`  
`end`  
  
  
`##`  
`## C, N: 3-21++G`  
`##`  
`basis spherical`  
`C    S`  
`    172.2560000              0.0617669        `  
`     25.9109000              0.3587940        `  
`      5.5333500              0.7007130        `  
`C    SP`  
`      3.6649800             -0.3958970              0.2364600        `  
`      0.7705450              1.2158400              0.8606190        `  
`C    SP`  
`      0.1958570              1.0000000              1.0000000        `  
`C    SP`  
`      0.0438000              1.0000000              1.0000000        `  
`N    S`  
`    242.7660000              0.0598657        `  
`     36.4851000              0.3529550        `  
`      7.8144900              0.7065130        `  
`N    SP`  
`      5.4252200             -0.4133010              0.2379720        `  
`      1.1491500              1.2244200              0.8589530        `  
`N    SP`  
`      0.2832050              1.0000000              1.0000000        `  
`N    SP`  
`      0.0639000              1.0000000              1.0000000        `  
`end`  
  
  
`##`  
`## Charge density fitting basis.`  
`##`  
`basis "cd basis"`  
`C    S`  
`      5.91553927E+02         0.31582020`  
`      1.72117940E+02         0.87503863`  
`      5.47992590E+01         2.30760524`  
`C    S`  
`      1.89590940E+01         1.0000000`  
`C    S`  
`      7.05993000E+00         1.0000000`  
`C    S`  
`      2.79484900E+00         1.0000000`  
`C    S`  
`      1.15863400E+00         1.0000000`  
`C    S`  
`      4.94324000E-01         1.0000000`  
`C    S`  
`      2.12969000E-01         1.0000000`  
`C    P`  
`      3.27847358E-01         1.0000000`  
`C    P`  
`      7.86833659E-01         1.0000000`  
`C    P`  
`      1.97101832E+00         1.0000000`  
`C    D`  
`      4.01330100E+00         1.0000000`  
`C    D`  
`      1.24750500E+00         1.0000000`  
`C    D`  
`      4.08148000E-01         1.0000000`  
`C    F`  
`      9.00000000E-01         1.0000000`  
`N    S`  
`      7.91076935E+02         0.41567506`  
`      2.29450184E+02         1.14750694`  
`      7.28869600E+01         3.01935767`  
`N    S`  
`      2.51815960E+01         1.0000000`  
`N    S`  
`      9.37169700E+00         1.0000000`  
`N    S`  
`      3.71065500E+00         1.0000000`  
`N    S`  
`      1.53946300E+00         1.0000000`  
`N    S`  
`      6.57553000E-01         1.0000000`  
`N    S`  
`      2.83654000E-01         1.0000000`  
`N    P`  
`      4.70739194E-01         1.0000000`  
`N    P`  
`      1.12977407E+00         1.0000000`  
`N    P`  
`      2.83008403E+00         1.0000000`  
`N    D`  
`      5.83298650E+00         1.0000000`  
`N    D`  
`      1.73268650E+00         1.0000000`  
`N    D`  
`      5.45242500E-01         1.0000000`  
`N    F`  
`      1.82648000E+00         1.0000000`  
`end`  
  
  
`##`  
`## Universal DFT parameters. Note, we are doing open-shell even for`  
`## the neutral fragment so the movecs have the correct size. `  
`##`  
`## We are using the CAM-B3LYP functional (no need to use "direct"`  
`## since we are doing CD fitting).`  
`##`  
`dft`  
`  xc xcamb88 1.00 lyp 0.81 vwn_5 0.19 hfexch 1.00`  
`  cam 0.33 cam_alpha 0.19 cam_beta 0.46`  
`  odft`  
`  convergence density 1d-9`  
`  grid fine`  
`  maxiter 1000`  
`end`  
  
  
`##`  
`## Converge bottom fragment with extra electron and top fragment as`  
`## neutral.`  
`##`  
`charge -1`  
`set geometry "bottom"`  
`dft`  
`  mult 2`  
`  vectors input atomic output "bottom.movecs"`  
`end`  
`task dft energy`  
  
`charge 0`  
`set geometry "top"`  
`dft`  
`  mult 1`  
`  vectors input atomic output "top.movecs"`  
`end`  
`task dft energy`  
  
  
`##`  
`## Assemble the two fragments but don't do SCF--this keeps the system`  
`## in a far-from-equilibrium state from which we will watch the`  
`## dynamics.`  
`##`  
`charge -1`  
`set geometry "dimer"`  
`dft`  
`  mult 2`  
`  vectors input fragment "bottom.movecs" "top.movecs" output "dimer.movecs"`  
`  noscf`  
`end`  
`task dft energy`  
  
  
`##`  
`## Now do RT-TDDFT from this crazy state without any electric fields.`  
`##`  
`rt_tddft`  
`  tmax 500.0`  
`  dt 0.2`  
`  load vectors "dimer.movecs"`  
  
`  print dipole field energy s2 charge`  
`end`  
`task dft rt_tddft`

<img alt="Time dependent charge oscillation between a TCNE dimer" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/nwchemgit/nwchem/RT_TDDFT_tcne_td_charge.png" align=middle with="364pt" height="200pt"/>  

The time-dependent charge shows that the excess electron starts on the
"bottom" molecule (i.e., a total electronic charge of -65), then swings
to completely occupy the "top" molecule then oscillates back and forth.
The frequency of this oscillation is dependent on the separation, with
larger separations leading to lower frequencies. It is important to
note, however, this starting point is highly non-physical, specifically
converging the two fragments together and "gluing" them together
introduces an indeterminate amount of energy to the system, but this
simulation shows how charge dynamics simulations can be done.
